README.md, before:

# Causal Modeling in Machine Learning

CS 7290 Special Topics in Data Science
Spring 2020
Prof. Robert Osazuwa Ness
Northeastern University, Khoury College of Computer Sciences
  	
## Time and Place: Thursdays, 6-9:15pm, room: TBA

## Syllabus and schedule

The syllabus is currently being revised but the syllabus from the [Summer 2019 class](https://github.com/robertness/causalML/blob/master/syllabus.md) is available as a reference.  However, the updated syllabus will be different in some aspects.

## Course Outcomes

Upon completing this course, you will be capable of building causal reasoning algorithms into decision-making systems in data science and machine learning teams within top-tier technology organizations.  You will have implemented a portfolio project that demonstrates this competence.  You will use the PyTorch-based probabilistic deep learning framework [Pyro](http://pyro.ai/) to implement the homework assignments and class project and will be an expert in using this framework by the end of the course.

## Who is this course for?

Prerequisites include (DS5220 and DS5230) or (CS6140 and CS6220) or approval of the instructor

You will gain the most from this course if you:

* You are familiar with random variables, joint probability distributions, conditional probabilities distributions, Baye's rule and basic ideas from Bayesian statistics, and expectation.
* You a good software engineer or aspire to be one.
* You work in or plan to work on a team running experiments in a top-tier tech company or a technically advanced retail company.
* You plan on working as an ML/AI research scientist and want to learn how to create agents that reason like humans.

## Course Description

This course will cover the following:

1. Causality in the context of model-based machine learning, probabilistic programming, and programmatic AI
1. Reasoning about probability distributions with directed acyclic graphs
1. Interventions and do-calculus, estimation of causal effects, covariate adjustment, and other methods of causal inference
1. Counterfactual reasoning and algorithmic counterfactuals
1. Causal reasoning in the context of A/B tests, multi-armed bandits, sequential decision-making, and reinforcement learning
1. Deep causal latent variable models

## Scribing

Each lecture will have a 2-3 assigned scribes who will be jointly responsible for producing notes in Markdown (we will make a template available). Each student will be assigned to two groups over the course of the semester. Notes will be due 1 week after the class takes place, and will be graded as part of the course work.

## Readings

Readings will be assigned in advance of class.  Students are expected to read the assigned readings in advance of each lecture.

This course does not require the purchase of textbooks.  However, it will rely heavily on the following two books:
* Pearl, Judea. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
* Peters, Jonas, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations and learning algorithms. MIT Press, 2017.
While not necessary for the course, these books are worth buying just to have as a reference.

## Homework

The homework in this class will consist of 5 problem sets, which will combine mathematical derivations with programming exercises in Python. Submissions must be made via blackboard by 11.59pm on the due date.

## Project

The goal of the project is to gain experience in implementing, testing, and presenting one of the methods covered in the lectures. Students will collaborate in groups of 2-4. We will provide a list of project descriptions.  Students who want to pursue a unique project should speak to the instructor.  Unique projects done in collaboration with a company are encouraged.

## Grading and Academic Guidelines

The final grade for this course will be weighted as follows:

    Homework: 40%
    Scribing: 20%
    Course Project: 40%

Refresh your knowledge of the university's [policy](http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/academic-integrity-policy/) about academic integrity and plagiarism (this includes plagarizing code). There is **zero-tolerance** for cheating!

## Self-evaluation

Students will be asked to indicate the amount of time spent on each homework, as well as the project. The will also be able to indicate what they think went well, and what they think did not go well.

Commit message:

Updated README.md with personal email

README.md, after:

# Causal Modeling in Machine Learning

CS 7290 Special Topics in Data Science
Spring 2020
Prof. Robert Osazuwa Ness
Northeastern University, Khoury College of Computer Sciences
  	
## Time and Place: Thursdays, 6-9:15pm, room: TBA

## Syllabus and schedule

The syllabus is currently being revised but the syllabus from the [Summer 2019 class](https://github.com/robertness/causalML/blob/master/syllabus.md) is available as a reference.  However, the updated syllabus will be different in some aspects.

*If you are thinking of signing up for the course and have questions, reach out to me at robertness@gmail.com, rather than my NEU email.*

## Course Outcomes

Upon completing this course, you will be capable of building causal reasoning algorithms into decision-making systems in data science and machine learning teams within top-tier technology organizations.  You will have implemented a portfolio project that demonstrates this competence.  You will use the PyTorch-based probabilistic deep learning framework [Pyro](http://pyro.ai/) to implement the homework assignments and class project and will be an expert in using this framework by the end of the course.

## Who is this course for?

Prerequisites include (DS5220 and DS5230) or (CS6140 and CS6220) or approval of the instructor

You will gain the most from this course if you:

* You are familiar with random variables, joint probability distributions, conditional probabilities distributions, Baye's rule and basic ideas from Bayesian statistics, and expectation.
* You a good software engineer or aspire to be one.
* You work in or plan to work on a team running experiments in a top-tier tech company or a technically advanced retail company.
* You plan on working as an ML/AI research scientist and want to learn how to create agents that reason like humans.

## Course Description

This course will cover the following:

1. Causality in the context of model-based machine learning, probabilistic programming, and programmatic AI
1. Reasoning about probability distributions with directed acyclic graphs
1. Interventions and do-calculus, estimation of causal effects, covariate adjustment, and other methods of causal inference
1. Counterfactual reasoning and algorithmic counterfactuals
1. Causal reasoning in the context of A/B tests, multi-armed bandits, sequential decision-making, and reinforcement learning
1. Deep causal latent variable models

## Scribing

Each lecture will have a 2-3 assigned scribes who will be jointly responsible for producing notes in Markdown (we will make a template available). Each student will be assigned to two groups over the course of the semester. Notes will be due 1 week after the class takes place, and will be graded as part of the course work.

## Readings

Readings will be assigned in advance of class.  Students are expected to read the assigned readings in advance of each lecture.

This course does not require the purchase of textbooks.  However, it will rely heavily on the following two books:
* Pearl, Judea. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
* Peters, Jonas, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations and learning algorithms. MIT Press, 2017.
While not necessary for the course, these books are worth buying just to have as a reference.

## Homework

The homework in this class will consist of 5 problem sets, which will combine mathematical derivations with programming exercises in Python. Submissions must be made via blackboard by 11.59pm on the due date.

## Project

The goal of the project is to gain experience in implementing, testing, and presenting one of the methods covered in the lectures. Students will collaborate in groups of 2-4. We will provide a list of project descriptions.  Students who want to pursue a unique project should speak to the instructor.  Unique projects done in collaboration with a company are encouraged.

## Grading and Academic Guidelines

The final grade for this course will be weighted as follows:

    Homework: 40%
    Scribing: 20%
    Course Project: 40%

Refresh your knowledge of the university's [policy](http://www.northeastern.edu/osccr/academic-integrity-policy/) about academic integrity and plagiarism (this includes plagarizing code). There is **zero-tolerance** for cheating!

## Self-evaluation

Students will be asked to indicate the amount of time spent on each homework, as well as the project. The will also be able to indicate what they think went well, and what they think did not go well.
